Next.
Masikat or Masi lives in Recto, Avenida.
In the cluster of houses
in front of the provincial bus station
at the back of Manila City Jail.
In a community that
depends on pedicab driving,
if not stealing things
or selling drugs.
Most of the women
have stalls around Divisoria
if not doing the classic livelihood
of doing laundry.
Masi is 16 years old
and his dream is to leave
the housefly-infested town.
His tidy appearance is a stark contrast
the griminess of Recto,
unblemished with no scars or scratches.
If he was left in the affluent part of town,
and was dressed up a bit,
he could pass off as a resident
of that neighborhood.
He’s not that smart,
but his dream is big enough.
Intelligence shouldn’t be measured
in the way one speaks
or in one’s broken English,
but in the way one can explain things
which could be learnt
at school or outside.
But the things that Masi lacks
is what makes him interesting.
He has a good grasp on education
and strongly believes
it’ll give him a better life.
He usually hangs out at Dan’s place,
also known as Daddy.
Dan is one of those people
who are well-off.
Masi often stays at other places,
especially since he lives in a cramped house.
Masi only knows that Dan’s a model.
Dan leaves at night
with an extremely powdered face
and comes back still smelling good
in the morning.
Masi takes care of Dan’s house.
From cleaning his shoes
to folding his shiny underwear.
Masi could almost be Dan's partner,
although he calls him Daddy.
In fact, they’re already like a couple
since they sleep together.
In exchange, Dan pays for his tuition.
But Masi doesn’t feel like a prostitute
especially since he respects
and loves Dan so much.
Until one day, Masi came down
with an intense fever.
His mother even had to bring him
to the hospital,
and that’s where he found out
that he was sick.
He was HIV positive.
That’s the description.
For the monologue,
I set it at dusk
inside a broken pedicab
at the sidewalk.
Masi's face to face
with his bestfriend, Lily.
Holding the paper
that San Lazaro Hospital gave him.
Lily is crying nonstop
while Masi is talking.
Masi.
Masi: “You keep on crying, honey.
It’s so annoying.”
“Stop it, already.”
“Why?”
He slaps her cheek.
"I'm still okay."
“You’re too judgmental.”
“The doctor said
that the Human-Inum—"
"Fuck, just read it. It’s all there.”
“I just have to take some meds.”
“I won’t die.”
“He said it’s just like diabetes.”
“In fact, my mother’s worries faded.”
“Because even grandma
has diabetes and she’s still alive.”
“My god, honey!
Think of how many meds I’ll take!”
“Aren’t the rich like that?”
“But dear, the meds have a side effect.”
“It’s like you’re dreaming
or you’re seeing things.”
“Maybe Recto might look better
and less ugly with this.”
“Maybe this Human inum-inum
could disappear.”
“Maybe I could still go to Daddy.”
“That’s all I see when there’s—
Fuck! It’s so hard to pronounce.”
There are cracks in his voice.
Lily: “Stop crying, dear.”
“I’ll still do your makeup.”
“We’ll still go to school together.”
”We’ll still be on fleek together.”
Masi: “I won’t die yet, right?”
“Come on! Give me the paper, hon.”
It’s like a short story.
[indistinct chatter]
What do you think?
- With how the character was described,
you really understand who he is.
In Maynard’s description of Masi,
you already know
this is going to be his language
because if he strays away from this,
you already know.
- The character is very clear
and the way Maynard
wrote the monologue of the character
is so out and you know,
suits the description.
This is one of the examples
of you giving situations
to see how the character will react
and you didn’t give him
a typical reaction like
“Hon! It’s just the two of us left,
we can do this.”
He's not like that.
In that scene,
you showed his characterization
without the typical,
“You know me, I’m happy with life.”
He really acted his characterization
without feeding or indicating so much,
which was nice.
Is he promiscuous or faithful to Daddy?
- What I’m thinking of right now
is more of that, the promiscuous one is--
So it means Daddy also has HIV?
- Looks like that’s the channel.
- He’s (Masi) the faithful one.
So, it’s not a loose,
loose life, right?
He just got it from one.
It didn’t figure in his equation.
He knows there’s free medicine
and these other things,
he seems to have been informed,
but the hospital also informs
you during counseling,
“How many partners have you had?”
That’s like the first question.
“Why am I asking?”
"Because one of them
might have infected you. "
"But I only have sex
with one person."
You could almost sense
that he would have to confront Daddy
about this if he wants
because right now,
what we can see
is his positive attitude.
By doing so, what does
he want now?
Apparently, he reacted to this illness
in a very, in fact,
his reaction is not normal.
Going crazy is more normal.
But he seems
to be very composed
and seems to be very
level-headed about his condition.
And so, because of that,
whether you’re thinking
if he’s in denial or not,
that level-headedness
is also what’s going to save him.
Right now, I think, that issue
has been resolved.
Oh game.
Erps. This isn't me, okay.
43 years old.
Erps is a name he got
since he was in highschool.
Back in the 80s,
as a corruption of brother: pre.
After graduating college,
he has been in the corporate world.
In one of his mid-life crisis moments,
he wanted to try other things,
particularly, writing.
He attended workshops,
dabbled into writing a little bit
And immersed himself
with a younger crowd.
He went to bars
and gay clubs
and that’s where he met Ardy,
who was 22 at that time.
There was an immediate
connection between the two.
And at the age of 40, single,
and not really attractive,
he found it interesting
to have someone like Ardy
be interested in him.
Erps and Ardy
had a rocky relationship
Most of the time with Ardy
calling it quits,
but Erps was very,
very patient and tolerant
to the point of being
taken advantage of.
For the two-year relationship
between Erps and Ardy
they’ve done many things,
shared many experiences,
And they considered each other
soulmates.
Even giving Erps
his first produced play.
This isn’t me.
And for two years they were together,
It was always Erps and Ardy.
Living together,
doing everything together
that aside from work and Ardy,
Erps didn’t have time
or interest in anything else
A few months later,
Ardy has died of dengue
And at one point,
Erps is blaming himself
for not taking care
of his soulmate.
Since Ardy’s death,
Erps has kept himself
busy with work.
Not really putting
himself out there.
Three months later,
Erps has met someone from work.
he is interested in.
Someone who
reminds him of Ardy.
Now he is beginning
to doubt himself.
This concept of soulmates.
If he has grieved enough
and it’s time to move on.
Or if it is too soon after using Ardy
that it’s a betrayal to even consider
someone else to be in a relationship with.
After all, they vowed to be soulmates.
That’s the character sketch.
Monologue?
This monologue is when
he’s talking to his friend on the phone.
Erps: “Hello, Babs?”
“Si Erps to, Euripides.
Yes, I know, long time.”
“Yup, still there.
San Miguel since birth.”
“Are you going out tomorrow?”
“Favor, can you come over
to my place?”
“My condo here in BGC
near Stopover.”
“I can meet you at Starbs
And go to my unit together.”
“Starbs, Starbucks.”
“And one more thing,
Can you bring your tarot cards?”
“Aren’t you into that sort of thing?"
“You know the weird, I mean,
occult, new age sort of stuff.”
“I want to get my fortune told."
“Do I need to prepare anything?”
“Like candles,
or I don’t know, tablecloth?”
“That’s red, velvet, red? Red velvet?”
“Oh, okay. For snacks.”
“Coffee, of course.”
“Alright, let’s set it.”
“3pm at Starbs."
“Starbs.”
“Are you g?”
“Nevermind, you’re pretty old.”
“Fine, I mean we.”
“Tomorrow ha.”
“G.”
The dengue seems corny for me.
- That comes with the...
guilt.
What does?
It’s like, who dies of dengue…
It seems shallow,
it’s so easy to solve it
in this day and age
But he kind of still missed out.
This might backfire. It's like--
Like, oh no he died of dengue,
he’s so old.
Usually, in terms of impression,
there’s more heartbreak
for a 10-year-old child
to die of dengue.
That gets in the way,
what the disease is.
In “Die Beautiful,”
we thought of not using AIDS
because it will open up a lot of,
so many different, other problems.
Then, let’s just make it...
what's it again?
Aneurysm.
Instant.
Gone.
Finished.
That's already solved.
No questions asked.
When you choose the illness,
choose one that won’t open
distracting questions to the audience.
Unless you want it in a comic way
like you’re saying,
“Oh my God, he died
because of dengue?”
“But there’s no mosquito
in the house!”
Unless you want
to play it up like that.
You can also embrace that, okay?
- This is Father Victor.
So we’re with Maui?
[inaudible]
- Who went jogging?
- The one who went jogging.
Is this a convent?
- Yeah.
Where is this?
Do you have a setting?
Yes
Where?
At the town of St. Nicolas.
Rural?
The area’s rural.
Father Victor, 30 years old.
Assistant parish priest in the town.
He just got back to the town
after staying in Manila for ten years.
The mayor’s wife is his old flame.
While studying philosophy in Manila,
he heard that his girlfriend got married
to his childhood friend, the mayor,
who's also the son of his parents’
employers before.
At the age of seven, his mother
left him for some man.
At the age of ten, he saw his father
burn alive in an old basement.
He was adopted
by the town’s parish priest
who sent him to study philosophy
in order to become a teacher.
Because of his ex-girlfriend’s marriage
to his childhood friend,
the parish priest forced him
to become a priest
in order to escape
that painful event in his life.
Fr. Victor grew up
having an inquisitive mind.
He’s usually withdrawn
at the seminary.
But he’s gotten into a lot of fights
Because of his short temper.
He’s playful to people close to him
but at unexpected moments,
you’ll see him quiet, but full of rage.
Monologue.
Fr. Victor: “Why did I agree to come back
to this cursed village”
“when I’ve been living
a quiet life in Manila?”
“To relive the wounds of the past?”
“No.”
“To stress my being a failure?”
“Yes, I’m a failure.”
“What do you mean no?
Why don’t you answer this question?”
“Why did my mother abandon me
When I was a child?”
“First, because she hates me."
“She hates poverty.”
“I was a sickly child.”
“Instead of taking care of me,
she left with some man.”
“No. My father had nothing to do
with mother’s decision to leave.”
“Father was a good person.”
“He’d do anything for us
to have a good life.”
“Yes, he was an alcoholic.”
“If you were my father,
you’d probably be an alcoholic ”
“just to escape poverty."
“Even so, my father never left me."
“If only he didn’t burn
with the basement of fertilizers,”
“he’d still be alive.”
“No. What happened
wasn’t an accident.”
“Someone killed him.”
“I saw it with my own eyes
while the basement was on fire.”
“It was locked from the outside.”
“Do you think cats
could lock a basement?”
“You’re right. It can’t”
“I’m sure of it.
My father was murdered.”
“Now, tell me I’m not a failure."
“Who?”
“That was a long time ago.”
“And she’s happy
with the life she chose.”
“She should be happy!
If not, then that’s karma.”
“I believe in karma.”
“Whatever you do to others,
will come back to you.”
“Sometimes, much more to you.”
“What do I care
if her husband hits her?”
“That’s just right so she can
at least feel the pain I felt”
“when she left me for another man.”
“She’s just like my mother.”
“Never content with what she has.”
“Not caring even if she hurts people.”
“Go ahead! She’s not the one in pain.”
“Karma is real.”
“And it’ll come at her doorstep.”
“Like an incurable disease.”
“And if it doesn’t come to her?”
“I tell you.”
“I’ll be karma itself
until she regrets the day she left me.”
“I’m a failure, but they’ll see
I won’t be alone.”
“Like what they did to me,
I’ll crush them into the failures they are.
Right now, he doesn’t sound like a priest.
He seems like a priest in label only.
- Sorry, why did he become a priest?
- He became a priest to escape
what was done to him.
- By the two girls?
- The one girl.
[inaudible]
The one who married the mayor.
- His anger when his girlfriend left him
is a step back
to when his mother left him.
- First, his mother left him.
Next, the woman he loved left him.
- When I wrote this,
it was a misbelief over something.
- Of some facts
that he didn’t know about.
- You asked a while ago,
how come he’s very angry here?
- What does he know?
- Just because she got married
he’s already so angry?
Victor’s objective
is apparently revenge.
When was that objective formed?
When he became a priest
or when he was already in town?
- When he got back to town.
- The dialogue I thought of for this
was he didn’t see any change in the town.
- When he left, it was still like that.
- Even after ten years,
he’s still seeing the same things.
Even the corruption.
Even after priesthood?
How many years was that?
About seven, I would say.
- He was fourth year in philosophy
when his ex got married.
- He studied priesthood for four years.
Four. Three years outside.
How about other parishes?
- Seven?
- It took 10 years for him to go back home.
Ten years. So how old was he then?
- Thirty.
Thirty. And the girl?
- About the same.
In those ten years, with how he talks,
I imagine he’s so angry,
In those ten years,
it's as if nothing affected
the way he talks.
Because of his words and his anger,
of his all-consuming hate,
I kind of hear the Victor
who hasn’t undergone priesthood yet.
I didn’t see the angry Victor
who became a priest.
That means he didn’t imbibe
the patience, virtues, philosophy he studied.
I imagined him like a friar.
He’s not the kind of priest
that we’re familiar with.
He’s like Padre Damaso
who’s holding something in,
but pleasant to everyone else.
But even then,
the likes of Padre Damaso,
the profanity that he spouts
is mixed with the religiosity he preaches.
In fact, “In Jesus’ Name” is his litany.
But here, there’s nothing like that,
which is what confuses me.
- I still don’t know
how I’m going to weave it
taking into consideration
what Rody said
that this is already
the devil talking
even Padre Damaso
would have some goodness inside.
No, it’s not the goodness
that I’m questioning.
It’s the language that he uses.
Even Maui is different.
Why would a church
in a farflung place allow
a flamboyant gay to live with them?
They would, of course,
ask for propriety.
If you want to do this,
do it but in a soft voice.
Those kinds of strictures.
In Victor’s monologue,
I don’t feel the establishment
of the church
because he’s not using
the language of the church.
What he’s using
is the language of a peasant
who is consumed with hate
but Victor has already undergone
a training of priesthood
and part of that training is…
for example, if you have an M.A.
and you’re angry,
you talk differently.
You use and rationalize
what you have learned
so that you can deepen
the premise of your anger.
I'm not saying turn Victor
into a soft-hearted person.
It could be there
but he’s using
what he has learned in priesthood,
what he has learned
in the establishment of the church
so that he can also rationalize it.
Like what you’re saying,
this is not revenge.
This is justice.
See, even that is already a perversion
of the tenets of the Catholic Church.
That’s what I’m looking for.
So that I can understand it better
and to convince myself
that yes, he’s angry,
but he’s still a priest.
In the same way
that we understand Padre Salvi.
He’s quiet but the way he engineered
the death of Maria Clara and Crisostomo Ibarra
using precisely the words of God.
That looks more evil.
Maybe that’s what would create
and shape your character uniquely.
Because we’re talking
about a man of God
and what we know of priests
is that they’re always quiet and calm,
But this is the opposite.
But if you do it in reverse,
it may disappear.
He still has to be
a man of God.
But he distorted it.
But we’re like that, right?
Even if we’re corrupt,
we rationalize it
because my child is like this,
rather than him dying,
I’ll just accept what the mayor gave.
Something like that, right?
But that’s in the milieu that you have.
In the same way, if that’s a priest,
I’m sure they’re rationalizing it
in religious terms.
- "I’m doing this because..."
- "Because of this."
"As Jesus said,"
You even quoted the Bible.
"When the four horsemen
of the apocalypse arrive."
I don’t know.
Justice is waiting and so on.
Maybe that’s where
the religious aspect comes in
because the traces
of the establishment would disappear.
- Do you have more suggestions?
- In terms of the character’s objective
that should be important to the protagonist?
Usually the character’s objective
is conceptual in the mind of the writer.
For example, she’s looking
for happiness or something
or sometimes it works
if the objective is physical
like she needs to pass the bar exams
or to go to Batanes.
How do you balance it?
Or do you have suggestions
on how to articulate the objectives
whether it’s for conceptual
or physical?
It has to be very concrete and specific.
It cannot be “I want love.”
"I want to feel love. "
That doesn’t mean anything.
It has to be very specific.
"I want.."
"my mother to come here and embrace me "
"...because she has been away
for so long and she has ignored me. "
It can be that specific.
But it still has to be an all-consuming desire.
Desire for revenge,
desire for closure.
The writer needs to be conscious
so it need not be articulated.
That is the reason why you’re dramatizing it.
You don’t need to say
at a certain point that he’s going to say that.
No.
He could hide or, in fact, deny it
because he was rationalizing.
For example, even revenge,
he could also deny it,
“I’m not out for revenge."
"I’m just out for justice”
Which in fact can be the same thing.
So there are many ways to execute it.
And the best way
is when you say something
without explicitly saying it.
The audience is the one who says it.
“Ah, he wants love.”
When she says that,
without you saying it at all in your play,
even the very word,
then you achieved it.
But to be more concrete in terms of objective,
that’s the most important.
Tomorrow, we’ll find out
how to make this more vivid.
Because you can’t really show
what the character wants
if there is no
obstacle.
Because if you don’t put an obstacle,
then she easily achieves it.
She easily achieves it.
Now, if you put an obstacle,
what he wants becomes clearer.
And the question, “Is he going to get it or not?”
becomes clearer to the audience
which is why it’s integral—
the relationship of the character and the conflict.
Right now, some of your characters
have not articulated what they really want.
And that’s why I’m asking you, writers,
whether you know or not.
Because if the character doesn’t know,
it’s probably alright.
But if the writer doesn’t know,
then you have a problem.
I’m not saying you
should have an answer right now.
In fact, maybe in the course
of writing the play, you may realize,
“Damn, this is not it.”
Something like that.
Even I want something different for him.
That’s also possible, right?
It’s not working.
What he wants is actually very simple.
It’s so easy to get.
So whatever obstacle you put,
he’ll get it, right?
That’s what’s slightly hard.
Clarifying what one really wants.